PRJNA639539	GSE152497	32882003	Anti-lymphoma activities of different compounds	4 lymphoma cell lines (DOHH2, OCILy10, TMD8 and Toledo) have been treated with DMSO, CB103, NEO02734 or OTX015. The transcriptome has been sequenced after 6hrs from the treatment. The gene expression levels have been compared in order to elucidate the differencies and similarities for the different drugs compare to DMSO (control group). Overall design: Transcriptome profiles of 6hrs and 14days for 6 lymphoma cell lines treated with DMSO, Vorinostat and Pracinostat.
PRJNA631783	GSE150336	Genome-wide maps of H3K27me3 and H3K27ac in cells treated with HDAC inhibition, EZH2 inhibition, or combined HDAC/EZH2 inhibition	Investigation of the mechanism by which combined EZH2 and HDAC inhibition kills PC3 prostate cancer cells. Next-generation sequencing was used to identify changes in genome localization of HDAC targets (H3K27ac) and EZH2 targets (H3K27me3) upon treatment with each inhibitor alone or in combination. Overall design: Examination of genome-wide localization of 2 different histone modifications in PC3 prostate cancer cells following treatment with Vehicle (DMSO), HDAC inhibition (VOR, Vorinostat), EZH2 inhibition (GSK126), or combined HDAC and EZH2 inhibition (COMBO)
PRJNA630152	GSE149784	Expression data in PC3 prostate cancer cells treated with DMSO, HDAC inhibitor, EZH2 inhibitor, or combined HDAC and EZH2 inhibitors.	Transcriptional profiles were examined in PC3 prostate cancer cells treated with vehicle (DMSO), vorinostat (VOR, HDACi), GSK126 (GSK126, EZH2i) or all 3 agents (COMBO) at 72 hours, prior to the commencement of cell death, to investigate the molecular mechamism by which these drugs and their combinations are functioning. Overall design: RNA was isolated from PC3 cells 72 hours after treatment with the indicated drugs (3 replicates per treatment arm)
PRJNA603558	GSE144399	32315286	Epigenetic Targeting of the Warburg Effect by Inhibition of Histone-Deacetylases Leads to Activation of Oxidative Metabolism	FDA-approved global (panobinostat, vorinostat) and selective (romidepsin) histone-deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors elicit metabolic reprogramming in concert with disruption of several Warburg-effect related super-enhancers Overall design: U87 and NCH644 cells were treated with panobinostat or romidepsin for 24h. Thereafter, cells were harvested and subjected to CHIP isolation. DNA was subsequently processed for CHIP sequencing.
PRJNA592964	GSE141253	31712839	Development of a neural rosette formation assay (RoFA) to identify neurodevelopmental toxicants and to characterize their transcriptome disturbances	The first in vitro tests for developmental toxicity made use of rodent cells. Newer teratology tests, e.g. developed during the ESNATS project, use human cells and measure mechanistic endpoints (such as transcriptome changes). However, the toxicological implications of mechanistic parameters are hard to judge, without functional/morphological endpoints. To address this issue, we developed a new version of the human stem cell-based test STOP-tox(UKN). For this purpose, the capacity of the cells to self-organize to neural rosettes was assessed as functional endpoint: pluripotent stem cells were allowed to differentiate to neuroepithelial cells for six days in the presence or absence of toxicants. Then, both transcriptome changes were measured (standard STOP-tox(UKN)), and cells were allowed to form rosettes. After optimization of staining methods, an imaging algorithm for rosette quantification was implemented and used for an automated rosette formation assay (RoFA). Neural tube toxicants (like valproic acid), which are known to disturb human development at stages when rosette-forming cells are present, were used as positive controls. Established toxicants led to distinctly different tissue organization and differentiation stages. RoFA outcome and transcript changes largely correlated concerning (i) the concentration-dependence, (ii) the time-dependence, and (iii) the set of positive hits identified amongst 24 potential toxicants. Using such comparative data, a prediction model for the RoFA was developed. The comparative analysis was also used to identify gene dysregulations that are particularly predictive for disturbed rosette formation. This ‘RoFA predictor gene set’ may be used for a simplified and less costly setup of the STOP-tox(UKN) assay. Overall design: We applied a test system (referred as the STOP-tox(UKN) or UKN1 test system) of developmental toxicity, related to the generation of neuroectoderm from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and exposed cells for six days to 24 different compounds (dimethyl sulfoxide, BIO, CHIR99021, lithium chloride, retinoic acid, geldanamycin, galnon, gleevec, estradiol, bisphenol A, interferon beta, cycloporin A/FK506, valproic acid, trichostatin-A, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat and entinostat, methylmercury, thimerosal, mercury(II)chloride, mercury(II)bromide, 4-chloromercuribenzoic acid and phenylmercuric acid). After 6 days, total RNA was isolated and gene expression studies were performed applying the human Genome U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Expression changes are always shown relative to an untreated control. At least three independent experiments have been performed.
PRJNA564530	GSE137086	32418621	Connectivity mapping of a chronic kidney disease progression signature identified lysine deacetylases as novel therapeutic targets	Motivation and design: Renal tubulointerstitial injury is an important determinant of chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression, yet treatment is limited to renin angiotensin system blockade. Accordingly, we performed global expression profiling in a 2 × 2 factorial design (N = 8 in each group) on RNA extracted from male Col4a3–/– mice and littermate controls on a 129X1/SvJ background at 4 and 7 weeks of age. Col4a3–/– mice have a mutation in the gene encoding the α3 chain of type IV collagen, associated with proteinuria and progressive loss of kidney function. We analyzed expression with Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Arrays and derived a novel CKD progression signature based on aging and disease in Col4a3–/– mice. Using our progression signature, we sought to repurpose existing drugs for the treatment of progressive CKD. Results: Computational drug repurposing with the Connectivity Map identified lysine deacetylase inhibitor, vorinostat, as a novel candidate treatment for this murine model of CKD. Treatment with vorinostat attenuated tubulointerstitial injury, fibrosis, and altered inflammation. Vorinostat administration significantly increased the lifespan of Col4a3–/– mice although effects on urinary albumin excretion, plasma creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen were modest. Conclusions: Our data suggest that expression profiling and computational drug repurposing can be used to identify novel drugs that may reverse gene expression changes in experimental CKD. Lysine deacetylase inhibition may be a novel treatment approach to CKD associated with proteinuria and progressive tubulointerstitial injury. Overall design: Kidney tissue from 4- and 7-week-old male Col4a3–/– mice and littermate controls was analyzed using Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Arrays. A total of 32 mice were studied with 8 mice per group.
PRJNA514236	GSE124898	30718356	Single-cell profiling of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma after treatment with vorinostat and photophoresis.	Cutaneous T cell lymphomas (CTCL), encompassing a spectrum of T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders involving the skin, have collectively increased in incidence over the last 40 years. Sézary syndrome (SS) is an aggressive form of CTCL characterized by significant presence of malignant cells in both the blood and skin. The guarded prognosis for SS reflects a lack of reliably effective therapy, due in part to an incomplete understanding of disease pathogenesis. Using single-cell sequencing of RNA at the induction of vorinostat and photopherisis treatment (GSE122703) and at the progression on therapy. We identifed thea decrease conventional SS cell markers on therapy and an increase in the number of cells expressing FOXP3+. Overall design: Single-cell RNA sequencing was performed on CD4+ T cells isolated from the blood of a patient with Sezary Syndrome using the 10x genomics 5-prime expression profiling kits. The peripheral blood sample was separated into cancerous (P4, CD3+CD4+CD5brightSSChi) and noncancerous (P5, CD3+CD4+CD5intSSCint).
PRJNA478583	GSE116451	30355619	Drug-induced change in gene expression across NCI-60 cell lines after exposure to 15 anticancer agents for 2, 6 and 24h (vorinostat)	To identify patterns of drug-induced gene modulation that occur across different cell types, we measured gene expression changes across NCI-60 cell lines after exposure to 15 anticancer agents. The results were integrated into a database and set of interactive analysis tools, the NCI Transcriptional Pharmacodynamics Workbench (NCI TPW), intended to allow exploration of gene expression modulation, including by molecular pathway, drug target, and association with drug sensitivity. We identified common transcriptional responses across drugs and cell types and uncovered cell signaling pathway–specific gene expression changes associated with drug sensitivity. We also demonstrated the value of this tool for investigating clinically relevant molecular hypotheses, utilizing the NCI TPW to assess drug-induced expression changes in genes associated with immune function and epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and to identify candidate biomarkers for drug activity. The NCI TPW provides a comprehensive resource to facilitate understanding of tumor cell characteristics that define sensitivity to anticancer drugs. Overall design: To compare and contrast transcriptional responses over time, in the NCI-60 cell line panel after treatment with 15 anticancer agents.
PRJNA474111	GSE115205	30510257	Genome wide analysis of SAHA (vorinostat) treatment in human iPSC-derived neurons from Tau A152T patients and controls	Purpose: The goal of this study was to assess gene expression changes upon SAHA treatment in neurons derived from patients with A152T Tau mutation Overall design: iPSC derived neurons were treated with SAHA at different dosage for several days
PRJNA474110	GSE115206	30510257	Genome wide analysis of SAHA (vorinostat) treatment in primary mouse cortical neurons upon miR-203 overexpression	Purpose: The goal of this study was to assess gene expression changes upon SAHA treatment in cells overexpressing miR-203. Overall design: Primary cortical cultures were established using E15 cortical cultures from C57BL/6J mice. At DIV0, cells were infectd with either miR-203 (high titre - 1MOI) or intermediate titre (0.5MOI) or control (high 1MOI) lentivirus andalso treated with different dose of SAHA. At DIV8, total RNA was isolated using NucleoSpin RNA XS kit (Takara). Libraries were prepared using Standard illumina stranded mRNA-seq protocol.
PRJNA437534	GSE111602	29961578	Defects in the alternative splicing-dependent regulation of REST cause deafness - [mouse brain cortex].	Functional characterization of the Bronx waltzer deafness gene	Transcriptional regulation by a novel deafness gene in the DFNA27 locus	The DNA-binding protein REST forms complexes with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to repress neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells. In differentiating neurons, REST is downregulated predominantly by transcriptional silencing. Here we report that post-transcriptional inactivation of REST by alternative splicing is required for hearing in humans and mice. We show that in the mechanosensory hair cells of the mouse ear, regulated alternative splicing of a frameshift-causing exon into the Rest mRNA is essential for the derepression of many neuronal genes. Heterozygous deletion of this alternative exon of mouse Rest causes hair cell degeneration and deafness, and the HDAC inhibitor SAHA (Vorinostat) rescues the hearing of these mice. In humans, inhibition of the frameshifting splicing event by a novel REST variant is associated with dominantly inherited deafness. Our data reveal the necessity for alternative splicing-dependent regulation of REST in hair cells, and identify a potential treatment for a group of hereditary deafness cases. Overall design: RNA-seq was used to generate cortical mRNA profiles of E15.5 wild-type (WT) mice and mutant mice that are heterozygous for the deletion of exon 4 of Rest (Rest[+/deltaExon4]).
PRJNA437533	GSE111603	29961578	Defects in the alternative splicing-dependent regulation of REST cause deafness - [mouse cultured organ of Corti].	Functional characterization of the Bronx waltzer deafness gene	Transcriptional regulation by a novel deafness gene in the DFNA27 locus	The DNA-binding protein REST forms complexes with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to repress neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells. In differentiating neurons, REST is downregulated predominantly by transcriptional silencing. Here we report that post-transcriptional inactivation of REST by alternative splicing is required for hearing in humans and mice. We show that in the mechanosensory hair cells of the mouse ear, regulated alternative splicing of a frameshift-causing exon into the Rest mRNA is essential for the derepression of many neuronal genes. Heterozygous deletion of this alternative exon of mouse Rest causes hair cell degeneration and deafness, and the HDAC inhibitor SAHA (Vorinostat) rescues the hearing of these mice. In humans, inhibition of the frameshifting splicing event by a novel REST variant is associated with dominantly inherited deafness. Our data reveal the necessity for alternative splicing-dependent regulation of REST in hair cells, and identify a potential treatment for a group of hereditary deafness cases. Overall design: RNA-seq analysis of the mRNA profiles of FK228- and solvent-incubated organ of Corti cultures. These organ cultures were derived from wild-type (WT) mice and mutant mice that are heterozygous for the deletion of exon 4 of Rest (Rest[+/deltaExon4]).
PRJNA437494	GSE111604	29961578	Defects in the alternative splicing-dependent regulation of REST cause deafness - [mouse utricles].	Functional characterization of the Bronx waltzer deafness gene	Transcriptional regulation by a novel deafness gene in the DFNA27 locus	The DNA-binding protein REST forms complexes with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to repress neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells. In differentiating neurons, REST is downregulated predominantly by transcriptional silencing. Here we report that post-transcriptional inactivation of REST by alternative splicing is required for hearing in humans and mice. We show that in the mechanosensory hair cells of the mouse ear, regulated alternative splicing of a frameshift-causing exon into the Rest mRNA is essential for the derepression of many neuronal genes. Heterozygous deletion of this alternative exon of mouse Rest causes hair cell degeneration and deafness, and the HDAC inhibitor SAHA (Vorinostat) rescues the hearing of these mice. In humans, inhibition of the frameshifting splicing event by a novel REST variant is associated with dominantly inherited deafness. Our data reveal the necessity for alternative splicing-dependent regulation of REST in hair cells, and identify a potential treatment for a group of hereditary deafness cases. Overall design: RNA-seq was used to generate utricular mRNA profiles of E15.5 wild-type (WT) mice and mutant mice that are heterozygous for the deletion of exon 4 of Rest (Rest[+/deltaExon4]).
PRJNA436005	GSE111140	29754815	DNA Seq data: biopy samples from patients pre- and post- treated with Vorinostat	BRAF(V600E) mutant melanomas treated with inhibitors of the BRAF and MEK kinases almost invariably develop resistance, which is frequently caused by reactivation of the Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway. To identify novel treatment options for such patients, we searched for acquired vulnerabilities of MAPK inhibitor-resistant melanomas. We find that resistance to BRAF+MEK inhibitors is associated with increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Subsequent treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) vorinostat represses SLC7A11 that leads to a lethal increase in the already elevated levels of ROS in drug-resistant cells, thereby causing selective apoptotic death of only the drug resistant tumor cells. Consistently, treatment of BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanoma with HDACi in mice results in a dramatic tumor regression. In a study in patients with advanced BRAF+MEK inhibitor resistant melanoma, we find that HDACi can selectively ablate drug-resistant tumor cells, providing clinical proof of concept for the novel therapy identified here. DNA Seq data: biopy samples from patients pre- and post- treated with Vorinostat; check mutations related to MAPKi-resistance Overall design: one replicate of DNA _178 gene panel , paired end, patient samples pre-post vorinostat treated
PRJNA435114	GSE110948	29754815	RNA Seq data: A375, A375R, A375DR vorinostat treated, and biopy samples from patients pre- and post- treated with Vorinostat	BRAF(V600E) mutant melanomas treated with inhibitors of the BRAF and MEK kinases almost invariably develop resistance, which is frequently caused by reactivation of the Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway. To identify novel treatment options for such patients, we searched for acquired vulnerabilities of MAPK inhibitor-resistant melanomas. We find that resistance to BRAF+MEK inhibitors is associated with increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Subsequent treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) vorinostat represses SLC7A11 that leads to a lethal increase in the already elevated levels of ROS in drug-resistant cells, thereby causing selective apoptotic death of only the drug resistant tumor cells. Consistently, treatment of BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanoma with HDACi in mice results in a dramatic tumor regression. In a study in patients with advanced BRAF+MEK inhibitor resistant melanoma, we find that HDACi can selectively ablate drug-resistant tumor cells, providing clinical proof of concept for the novel therapy identified here. Overall design: one replicate of RNA Seq data A375, A375R, A375DR vorinostat treated and patient samples pre- post- vorinostat treatment
PRJNA396949	GSE102187	29706951	Transcriptional Modulation of Human Endogenous Retroviruses in Primary CD4+ T Cells Following Vorinostat Treatment	Purpose: In an HIV cure setting, Vorinostat may provide the “shock” capable of flushing HIV out of the persistent reservoir, while antiretroviral therapy is used to prevent new infections. However, this drug may modulate the expression of human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs). This study demonstrates significant modulation of HERVs and suggests that they should be considered as off-target effects of this drug treatment. Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were collected from 4 healthy donors. Naive CD4 T cells were isolated and utilized to assess HERV dysregulation after treatment with Vorinostat. Cells were collected for study and exposed to a dose of Vorinostat (10uM dose over a 24 hour period). After this, RNA was extracted from cells and their untreated paired counterparts for deep sequencing by Expression Analysis. Sequence reads that passed quality filters were mapped to the HERVd reference database using Bowtie and counted using HTSeq. Any HERV which did not achieve at least 1 count per million mapped and counted reads in at least 4 samples was discarded. Differential expression was performed upon the filtered dataset with edgeR and using TMM normalization. Results: Using an custom built data analysis pipeline, ~100 million reads per sample were mapped to the HERVd reference database and identified 10784 distinct dysregulated elements Bowtie/HTSeq workflow. Differential expression analysis was performed between vorinostat treated and untreated conditions which demonstrated 2102 dysregulated HERV elements with 1007 downregulated and 1095 upregulated (FDR < 0.05) with EdgeR. Results were further subset with a log2FC ± 3 which resulted in 451 upregulated and 363 downregulated HERV elements from 81 and 82 distinct families respectively. HERV elements from the LTR12 family were by far the most dramatically upregulated in family frequency and fold change magnitude. Further confirmation with droplet digital PCR confirmed upregulation of LTR12 elements and demonstrated an exponential dose response curve with HERV expression found at even moderate doses (334nM) of vorinostat treatment. Conclusions: This study represents the first detailed analysis of HERV dysregulation following vorinostat treatment using the untargeted approach of total RNA-Seq. These results demonstrate that vorinostat dysregulates multiple HERV families with a propensity to upregulate members of the LTR12 HERV family. This study also provides a methodology to analyze HERV dysregulation in future treatments with vorinostat or other drugs by providing a mechanism to choose primer and probe sets which will properly represent HERV dysregulation as expression across an HERV is not uniform or continuous. Finally, this work suggests that HERV dysregulation by vorinostat treatment should be considered an off-target effect of this drug and HERV elements, such as LTR12, should be monitored as biomarkers during shock and kill clinical trials with HDAC inhibitors and that trial subjects should be screened to explore further HIV:HERV interactions. Overall design: Profiles of 4 healthy donors in 2 conditions (8 paired total samples) were generated with deep sequencing by Expression Analysis.
PRJNA379282	GSE96649	28686666	Effects of Belinostat and Dexamethasone treatment of A549 gene expression	Glucocorticoid resistance (GCR), i.e. unrespon­siveness to the beneficial anti-inflammatory activities of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), poses a serious problem in the treatment of inflammatory diseases. One possible solution to try and overcome GCR, is to identify molecules that prevent or revert GCR by hyper-stimulating the biological activity of the GR. To this purpose, we screened for compounds that potentiate the dexamethasone (Dex)-induced transcriptional activity of GR. To monitor GR transcriptional activity, the screen was performed using the lung epithelial cell line A549 in which a glucocorticoid responsive element (GRE) coupled to a luciferase reporter gene construct was stably integrated. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) such as Vorinostat and Belinostat are two broad-spectrum HDACi that strongly increased the Dex-induced luciferase expression in our screening system. In sharp contrast herewith, results from a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of Dex-induced transcripts using RNAseq, revealed that Belinostat impairs the ability of GR to transactivate target genes. The stimulatory effect of Belinostat in the luciferase screen further depends on the nature of the reporter construct. In conclusion, a profound discrepancy was observed between HDACi effects on two different synthetic promoter-luciferase reporter systems. The favorable effect of HDACi on gene expression should be evaluated with care, when considering them as potential therapeutic agents. Overall design: 12 samples total, 4 conditions with 3 biological replicates each
PRJNA376596	GSE95297	Dynamics of HIV Latency and Reactivation in a Primary CD4+ T Cell Model	HIV latency is a major obstacle to curing infection. Current strategies to eradicate HIV aim at increasing transcription of the latent provirus. In the present study we observed that latently infected CD4+ T cells from HIV-infected individuals failed to produce viral particles upon ex vivo exposure to SAHA (vorinostat), despite effective inhibition of histone deacetylases. To identify steps that were not susceptible to the action of SAHA or other latency reverting agents, we used a primary CD4+ T cell model, joint host and viral RNA sequencing, and a viral-encoded reporter. This model served to investigate the characteristics of latently infected cells, the dynamics of HIV latency, and the process of reactivation induced by various stimuli. During latency, we observed persistence of viral transcripts but only limited viral translation. Similarly, the reactivating agents SAHA and disulfiram successfully increased viral transcription, but failed to effectively enhance viral translation, mirroring the ex vivo data. This study highlights the importance of post-transcriptional blocks as one mechanism leading to HIV latency that needs to be relieved in order to purge the viral reservoir. Overall design: Establishment and maintenance of HIV latency+ reactivation with different agents. RNAseq was performed for both HIV infected and mock infected cells at: Week 0,2,4,6,8 and 10 of latency and at 8, 24 and/or 72 hours post reactivation with vorinostat (SAHA), disulfiram (disu), azacytidine (aza), interleukin-7 (IL-7), anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (antiCD3) or DMSO).
PRJNA360387	GSE93235	28352654	Net silencing by let-7i in Postural Tachycardia Syndrome	While strongly implicated in Postural Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS), considerable controversy exists regarding norepinephrine transporter (NET) loss-of-function. POTS is characterized by the clinical symptoms of orthostatic intolerance, light-headedness, tachycardia and syncope or near syncope with upright posture. Abnormal sympathetic nervous system activity is typical, of a type which suggests dysfunction of the NET, with evidence the gene responsible is under tight epigenetic control. Using RNA of isolated chromatin combined with sequencing (RICh-Seq) we show let7i miRNA suppresses NET by MeCP2. Vorinostat restores epigenetic control and NET expression in POTS. Overall design: We used biotin labeled locked nucleic acid oligonucleotides to pull-down three regions of the NET (SLC6A2) gene promoter from sheared chromatin. These NET enriched fractions underwent small RNA library preparation and Illumina sequencing (labeled “NET_rep1-3”). As a negative control, we used a pool of scrambled probes (labeled “scrambled_rep1-3”). We also sequenced small RNA from chromatin that did not undergo enrichment (labeled “input_rep1-3”).
PRJNA341945	GSE86445	Integrated analysis of the molecular action of Vorinostat identifies epi-sensitised targets for combination therapy	Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is a highly heterogeneous entity of disorders in haematopoietic progenitors, characterised by an arrest in differentiation and an outgrowth of myeloid blasts in the bone marrow. AML is a disease of the aging, many patients are unable to withstand standard chemotherapy therefore novel approaches for anti-cancer agents has arisen in the understanding of epigenetic regulation in cancer cells, such as chromatin remodelling. Acetylation of histones is a reversible process, whereby acetyl groups are transferred on the ε-amino groups of specific lysine residues by a specific group of enzymes, histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and removed by histone deacetylase complexes (HDACs). HDACs are involved in regulating a number of processes in the cell, such as cell proliferation, differentiation as well as apoptosis. Deregulation of the activity of these enzymes is associated with cancer; therefore it is important that the HAT and HDAC equilibrium is regained. This equilibrium can be improved through the inhibition of HDAC enzymes using HDAC inhibitors. Vorinostat is a HDAC inhibitor, clinically approved for the treatment of CTCL, and is in phase II clinical trials for AML and a number of haematological malignancies. Studies have shown that some patients are non-responsive/resistant to Vorinostat; therefore a fuller characterisation of Vorinostat needs to be made so an adequate combination drug can be identified, as understanding of resistance is crucial to overcoming it. The purpose of this study was to provide a comprehensive analysis of Vorinostat in AML cell lines and to identify potential synergistic therapies that could be used in combination with Vorinostat to provide a better outlook in AML. The global identification of genes associated with Vorinostat induced histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) acetylation, investigated using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with next generation sequencing (ChIP-SEQ), was integrated with data from gene expression studies to provide a comprehensive approach to understanding Vorinostat. This study has identified the sonic hedgehog homolog (SHH) as a rational and potential therapeutic target for combination therapy with Vorinostat Overall design: Six samples: three controls treated with DMSO and three with 1 µM SAHA (Vorinostat) were hybridized to Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChips
PRJNA339552	GSE85853	28625481	Chromatin accessibility landscape of cutaneous T cell lymphoma and dynamic response to HDAC inhibitors	Here, we define the landscape and dynamics of active regulatory DNA in cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) by Assay of Transposase-Accessible Chromatin (ATAC-seq). Analysis of 111 human CTCL and control samples revealed extensive chromatin signatures that distinguished leukemic vs. non-leukemic (host) CD4+ T cells in CTCL patients, vs. CD4+ T cells in healthy donors. We identify three dominant patterns of transcription factor (TF) activation that drive leukemia regulomes, as well as TF deactivations that alter host T cells in CTCL patients. Clinical response to histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) is strongly associated with a concurrent gain in chromatin accessibility. HDACi causes distinct chromatin responses in leukemic and host CD4+ T cells, reprogramming host T cells toward normalcy. These results provide a foundational framework to study personal regulomes in human cancer and epigenetic therapy. Overall design: We examined chromatin structure using ATAC-seq in purified human CD4+ T cells in 30 samples from 10 health donors and 81 samples from 14 patiets with cutaneous T cell leukemia (CTCL), treated with HDACi anti-cancer drugs, such as Vorinostat and Romidepsin. Each donor provided cells per time point via a single standard 5 ml blood draw, and CD4+ T cells were isolated applying RosetteSep Human CD4+ T Cell Enrichment Cocktail (Experimental Procedures). Because CTCL is typically characterized by a dominant CD4+ T cell clone bearing an unique T cell receptor, we purified CTCL leukemic cells from patients (defined by CD4+, CD26-, and T cell receptor V-beta clone+) vs. host CD4+ T-cell (defined by CD4+, CD26-, V-beta clone-) from the same patients by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). Leukemic, host and bulk T cells were obtained from 10 out of 15 patients who had detectable V-beta clone, and only bulk T cells were obtained for the remaining 5 patients without detectable V-beta clone. Although number and proportion of leukemic and host cells varies depending on the stage and drug response of each individual, especially at a later stage of drug treatment, we were able to obtain at least 50,000 CD4+ T cells per sample. Please note that the indicated 'Day' (in the sample title) for Normal donors means when the blood was drew. For example “Normal_Donor1_Day38_Rep2” means this sample was drew on day 38. Day for Patients means days after the first drug treatment. For example “BulkCTCL_Patient1366_Romi_Day28” means this is a Bulk cell sample from Patient 1366, who was treated with Romidepsin, and the blood was drew on Day 28 according to the first day of treatment, and on that day, the patient was also treated with the same drug.
PRJNA337958	GSE85257	27634755	Study of transcriptional effects of Vorinostat, Sorafenib and Resveratrol on SNU-387 and HepG2/C3A hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines	Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Like in many cancers, tumor heterogeneity in HCC hampers the development of personalized therapies. Integrative genomics contributed to characterize HCC subtypes by identifying specific genetic alterations and molecular signatures, leading to targeted drug candidates. However, no consensus was achieved for genes and pathways recurrently altered in HCC. Here, a meta-analysis of 15 independent HCC datasets identifies a comprehensive signature consisting of 935 genes commonly deregulated in HCC as compared to the surrounding non-tumor tissue (P<0.01). The 935-gene HCC signature covers well-established cancer hallmarks (e.g. proliferation, metabolic reprogramming, microenvironment remodeling) together with specific hallmarks associated with protein turnover and epigenetics. Accordingly, the 935-gene HCC signature highlights relevant drugs for systemic therapies, including including two histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (trichostatin A and vorinostat), PI3K inhibitor LY294002, mTOR inhibitor sirolimus (also known as rapamycin), alpha-estradiol and resveratrol. The impact of these drugs as compared to sorafenib that is currently used for the treatment of advanced HCC was evaluated on the viability of 6 HCC-derived cell lines. We concluded that combined therapies targeting common and subtype-specific cancer networks may represent a relevant strategy to efficiently treat liver cancer. Overall design: SNU-387 (ATCC® CRL-2237™, grade IV/V) and HepG2/C3A (ATCC® CRL-10741™) were grown in a RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 100U/ml penicillin, 100μg/ml streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum. Cultures were performed at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Resveratrol, sorafenib and vorinostat were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Heidelberg, Germany). All molecules were solubilized in a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution. For the microarray experiments the concentrations were optimized to induce 50% cell mortality after a 72h drug exposure, in order to allow the extraction of nucleic acids from the remaining viable cells. Experiments were performed in monoplicates.
PRJNA328279	GSE84205	28963352	mTOR and HDAC inhibitors converge on the TXNIP/thioredoxin pathway to cause catastrophic oxidative stress and regression of RAS-driven tumors	mTOR and HDAC inhibitors induce cell death of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) in vitro, and in vivo We performed microarray analysis of mTOR and HDAC inhibition alone and in combination 24 hours after treatment, prior to induction of cell death, to identify transcriptional changes that might be mechanistic drivers of the therapeutic efficacy Overall design: 12 samples, in triplicate, 3X vehicle, 3X INK-128, 3X Vorinostat, 3X INK-128 + Vorinostat
PRJNA319585	GSE80657	27599042	Hypoxia-independent gene expression signature associated with radiosensitisation of prostate cancer cell lines by histone deacetylase inhibition	We aimed to investigate gene expression associated with radiosensitisation of normoxic and hypoxic prostate cancer cells by the class I/II histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) vorinostat. A pronounced deregulation of DNA repair and chromatin organization genes by vorinostat in DU 145 than in PC-3 or 22Rv1 was found and was a likly mechanism underlying radiosensitisation of DU 145. Expression of these genes was generally not affected by hypoxia and was altered by vorinostat in DU 145 towards the baseline levels of PC-3 and 22Rv1. A 56-gene expression signature associated with radiosensitisation under normoxia and hypoxia, including 8 genes with baseline expression characteristic of the radiosensitising effect was generated. These findings propose a hypoxia independent expression signature to predict the radiosensitising effect of vorinostat. Overall design: DU 145, PC-3 and 22Rv1 cell lines, for which differences in intrinsic radiosensitivity have been demonstrated in previous work, were exposed to vorinostat (1µM, 24h) and hypoxia (0.2% O2, 24h), subjected to gene expression profiling and irradiated at 2 and 5 Gy. Samples collected for gene expression analysis were taken prior to irradiation. Vorinostat mediated radiosensitisation occurred under normoxia and hypoxia in the intrinsically radioresistant DU 145, but not in the radiosensitive PC-3 and 22Rv1. To identify a gene expression signature most likely playing a major role in the vorinostat mediated radiosensitisation, a supervised analysis of global gene expression data were performed.
PRJNA315265	GSE79246	27634755	Study of transcriptional effects of drugs on SNU-423 hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines	Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Like in many cancers, tumor heterogeneity in HCC hampers the development of personalized therapies. Integrative genomics contributed to characterize HCC subtypes by identifying specific genetic alterations and molecular signatures, leading to targeted drug candidates. However, no consensus was achieved for genes and pathways recurrently altered in HCC. Here, a meta-analysis of 15 independent HCC datasets identifies a comprehensive signature consisting of 935 genes commonly deregulated in HCC as compared to the surrounding non-tumor tissue (P<0.01). The 935-gene HCC signature covers well-established cancer hallmarks (e.g. proliferation, metabolic reprogramming, microenvironment remodeling) together with specific hallmarks associated with protein turnover and epigenetics. Accordingly, the 935-gene HCC signature highlights relevant drugs for systemic therapies, including including two histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (trichostatin A and vorinostat), PI3K inhibitor LY294002, mTOR inhibitor sirolimus (also known as rapamycin), alpha-estradiol and resveratrol. The impact of these drugs as compared to sorafenib that is currently used for the treatment of advanced HCC was evaluated on the viability of 6 HCC-derived cell lines. We concluded that combined therapies targeting common and subtype-specific cancer networks may represent a relevant strategy to efficiently treat liver cancer. Overall design: SNU-423 cells (ATCC® CRL-2238™, grade III/IV) were grown in a RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 100U/ml penicillin, 100μg/ml streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum. Cultures were performed at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Alpha-estradiol, LY294002, rapamycin, resveratrol, sorafenib and vorinostat were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Heidelberg, Germany). Trichostatin A was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All molecules were solubilized in a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution. For the microarray experiments the concentrations were optimized to induce 50% cell mortality after a 72h drug exposure, in order to allow the extraction of nucleic acids from the remaining viable cells. Experiments were performed in monoplicates.
PRJNA312888	GSE78188	28174276	Gene expression profiling of CUTLL cell lines upon 17 drug treatments	The clinical development of targeted therapies has been hampered by their limited intrinsic antitumor activity and the rapid emergence of resistance, highlighting the need to identify highly active and synergistic drug combinations. However, empirical synergistic drug screening approaches are challenging and elucidating the mechanisms that underlie such drug interactions is typically complex. Here we performed an expression based screen and network analyses to identify drugs amplyfiying the antitumor effects of NOTCH inhibition in T-ALL. These studies uncovered a novel and druggable synthetic lethal interaction between supression of protein translation and NOTCH inhibition in T-ALL. Our results illustrate the power of expression-based analyses towards the identification and functional characterization of new antitumor drug combinations for the treatment of human cancer. Overall design: CUTLL cell lines were treated with drugs (Pyrvinium P, Vorinostat, Geldanamycin, Lanatoside C, Withaferin A, Prochlorperazine, Astemizole, Mefloquine, Trichostatin A, Rapamycin, Parthenolide, Valproic acid, Thioridazine, Trifluoperazine, Phenoxibenzamine, Wortmannin, Resveratrol) or DMSO control at 24hrs in 3 replicates.
PRJNA302151	GSE74970	26636678	Histone deacetylase inhibitors antagonize distinct pathways to suppress tumorigenesis of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.	Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) is the most common soft tissue cancer in children and is characterized by myogenic differentiation arrest. The prognosis of patients with relapsed or metastatic disease remains poor. ERMS genomes show few recurrent mutations, suggesting that other molecular mechanisms such as epigenetic regulation might play major role in driving ERMS tumor biology. In this study, we have demonstrated the diverse roles of HDACs in the pathogenesis of ERMS by characterizing effects of HDAC inhibitors, trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; also known as vorinostat) in vitro and in vivo. TSA and SAHA suppress ERMS tumor growth and progression by inducing myogenic differentiation as well as reducing the self-renewal and migratory capacity of ERMS cells. Overall design: To identify candidate genes that are differentially regulated in histone deacetylase inhibitor-treated embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, a gene expression profiling study using the Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 microarray platform and ingenuity pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes were performed on RD and 381T cells treated with trichostatin A or dimethyl sulfoxide (treatment vehicle).
PRJNA297482	GSE73648	28216661	U937 miR-194-5p (UmiR-194-5p) vs U937 miR-194-5p (UmiR-194-5p) treated with SAHA (Vorinostat; suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid)	Transcriptional profiling of U937 miR-194-5p (UmiR-194-5p) vs U937 miR-194-5p (UmiR-194-5p) treated with SAHA (Vorinostat; suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) for 24 h at 5uM concetration Overall design: Different Experimental Conditions: U937 miR-194-5p (UmiR-194-5p) (U937 transfected with miR-194-5p vector) vs UmiR-194-5p (U937 transfected with miR-194-5p vector) treated with SAHA for 24 h at 5uM concetration. Two replicates.
PRJNA290402	GSE71127	26272509	27188386	31712839	A transcriptome-based classifier to identify developmental toxicants by stem cell testing: design, validation, and optimization for histone deacetylase inhibitors	Test systems to identify developmental toxicants are urgently needed. A combination of human stem cell technology and transcriptome analysis was used here to provide proof-of-concept that toxicants with a related mode of action can be identified, and grouped for read-across. We chose a test system of developmental toxicity, related to the generation of neuroectoderm from pluripotent stem cells (UKN1), and exposed cells for six days to benchmark concentration (BMC) of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) valproic acid, trichostatin-A, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat and entinostat. To provide insight into their toxic action, we identified HDACi consensus genes, assigned them to superordinate biological processes, and mapped them to a human transcription factor network constructed from hundreds of transcriptome data sets. We also tested a heterogeneous group of ‘mercurials’ (methylmercury, thimerosal, mercury(II)chloride, mercury(II)bromide, 4-chloromercuribenzoic acid, phenylmercuric acid) (BMCs). Microarray data were compared at the highest non-cytotoxic concentration for all 12 toxicants. A support vector machine (SVM)-based classifier predicted all HDACi correctly. For validation, the classifier was applied to legacy data sets of HDACi, and for each exposure situation, the SVM predictions correlated with the developmental toxicity. Finally, optimization of the classifier based on 100 probe sets showed that eight genes (F2RL2, TFAP2B, EDNRA, FOXD3, SIX3, MT1E, ETS1, LHX2) are sufficient to separate HDACi from mercurials. Our data demonstrate, how human stem cells and transcriptome analysis can be combined for mechanistic grouping and prediction of toxicants. Extension of this concept to mechanisms beyond HDACi would allow prediction of human developmental toxicity hazard of unknown compounds with the UKN1 test system. Overall design: We applied a test system (next referred as the UKN1 test system) of developmental toxicity, related to the generation of neuroectoderm from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and exposed cells for six days to the histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) valproic acid, trichostatin-A, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat and entinostat, as well as to the mercurial compounds methylmercury, thimerosal, mercury(II)chloride, mercury(II)bromide, 4-chloromercuribenzoic acid and phenylmercuric acid. After 6 days, total RNA has been isolated and gene expression studies were performed applying the human Genome U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Untreated and vehicle controls (Ethanol and DMSO) have been also investigated. At least four independent experiments have been performed.
PRJNA287275	GSE69958	28216661	K562 ctrl vs K562 Saha (Vorinostat; suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) 6h	miRNA expression profiling of K562 ctrl vs K562 treated Saha 5 µM 6h Overall design: Two-condition experiment, K NT (K562 ctrl) vs K 6h s (K562 treated Saha 5 µM 6h) Biological replicates: 3 control, 3 treated, independently grown and harvested at 6 hours. One replicate per array. LC sciences service
PRJNA287274	GSE69957	28216661	U937 ctrl vs U937 Saha (Vorinostat; suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) 6h	miRNA expression profiling of U937 ctrl vs U937 treated Saha 5 µM 6h Overall design: Two-condition experiment, U NT (U937 ctrl) vs U 6h s (U937 treated Saha 5 µM 6h) Biological replicates: 3 control, 3 treated, independently grown and harvested at 6 hours. One replicate per array. LC sciences service
PRJNA287273	GSE69956	28216661	KASUMI-1ctrl vs KASUMI-1 Saha (Vorinostat; suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) 6h	miRNA expression profiling of KASUMI-1 ctrl vs KASUMI-1 treated Saha 5 µM 6h Overall design: Two-condition experiment, KA NT (KASUMI-1 ctrl) vs KA 6h s (KASUMI-1 treated Saha 5 µM 6h) Biological replicates: 3 control, 3 treated, independently grown and harvested at 6 hours. One replicate per array. LC sciences service
PRJNA275442	GSE65936	Preclinical investigation of the novel histone deacetylase inhibitor AR-42 in the treatment of cancer-induced cachexia	Purpose: We assessed the anti-cachectic activity of the novel HDAC inhibitor AR-42 in murine models of cancer cachexia. Methods: Effects on classic features of cachexia, including decreased body weight, skeletal muscle and adipose tissue mass, muscle fiber cross-sectional area, and muscle strength, and increased intramuscular mRNA expression of E3 ligases Atrogin-1/MAFbx and MuRF1 were examined. Metabolomic analysis, whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis, and cytokine profiling were used to compare metabolic phenotype and mRNA expression profiles in muscle, and cytokine production in serum, respectively, in AR-42- and vehicle-treated tumor-bearing and tumor-free control mice. Results: Orally administered AR-42 suppressed cancer cachexia in the C-26 colon adenocarcinoma model. This anti-cachectic effect, also confirmed in Lewis lung carcinoma-bearing mice, was not observed after treatment with other HDAC inhibitors (vorinostat, romidepsin). Cytokine profiling and RNA-seq analyses revealed effects of AR-42 on tumor-induced changes in inflammatory cytokine production and multiple transcriptional programs in muscle, including the inhibition of multiple pro-cachexia drivers, such as IL-6 and its receptor IL-6ra, leukemia inhibitory factor, Foxo1, Atrogin-1, MuRF1, adipose triglyceride lipase, uncoupling protein 3, and myocyte enhancer factor 2c. Metabolomic analysis indicated the reprogramming of skeletal muscle metabolism, including reduced glycolysis and glycogen synthesis and increased protein degradation, which was restored by AR-42 to a state characteristic of tumor-free mice. Conclusions: These findings support further investigation of AR-42 as part of a comprehensive therapeutic strategy for cancer cachexia. Overall design: Mice bearing subcutaneous C-26 tumors, as well as tumor-free mice, were randomized into groups that were treated with either AR-42 (50 mg/kg, p.o. by gavage, every other day) or vehicle (0.5% methylcellulose (w/v) and 0.1% Tween-80 (v/v) in sterile water) starting 6 days after cell injection. Skeletal muscles (hind limb) were harvested at terminal sacrifice on day-15 after tumor cell injection, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 degress F until analysis. For RNA-seq, 3 muscle samples were analyzed from each of 4 groups: (a) tumor-bearing/vehicle treated (T/Veh); (b) tumor-bearing/AR-42-treated (T/AR); (c) tumor-free/vehicle-treated (TF/Veh); (d) tumor-free/Ar-42-treated (TF/AR).
PRJNA270184	GSE64119	Insights into the combined action of SAHA (vorinostat) and Mithramycin A in Sézary cells through gene expression profiling	Suberoyl Anilide Hydroxamic Acid (SAHA), also named under Vorinostat, is an inhibitor of class I and II histone deacetylases (HDACi) approved by the USA Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of advanced and refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL). Its limited efficacy led to its use in various combination therapies. Given that SAHA modifies the expression of many genes under control of Sp1 (or Sp3) transcription factors, we investigated here its association to the FDA-approved anticancer antibiotic Mithramycin (MitA), a direct inhibitor of the binding of Sp1 family factors to GC-rich DNA promoters. We found that MitA alone, similar to SAHA, efficiently induced the apoptotic death of peripheral blood lymphocytes from Sézary syndrome (SS) patients while the two drugs in combination demonstrated a synergistic effect that could even overcome the resistance to MitA used in mono-treatment. A deep analysis of gene expression profiling suggested that SAHA and MitA, either independently or synergistically, counteracted many intertwined pro-survival pathways mis-regulated in SS cells as TCR, Notch1, mTOR, PI3K/Akt, JAK/STAT and b-catenin pathways, as well as the resistance of these tumors to intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis. This analysis also suggested that SAHA/MitA combined treatment might efficiently oppose to the abnormal adhesion, migration and invasive properties of SS cells, in addition their immunosuppressive behavior. Finally, from a mechanistic point of view, our observations strongly support a major role of additive or synergistic epigenetic modifications in the combined effect of the two drugs, with a rather limited contribution of Sp1 (or Sp3)-mediated transcriptional regulation. Peripheral blood tumor cells from Sézary patients were expanded in vitro and treated with SAHA and/or MitA previous to RNA isolation and Microarray processing. Deep analysis of gene expression profiling suggested that SAHA and Mithramycin A (MitA), either independently or synergistically, counteracted many interwined pro-survival pathways mis-regulated in Sézary cells, as well as abnormal adhesion, invasion and invasive properties. Data also favored additive or synergistic epigenetic modifications in the combined effect of the two drugs. Overall design: Total RNAs were extracted from 48 samples corresponding to 4 patients, 4 treatments (no drug, SAHA, MitA, SAHA+MitA) and three biological replicates.
PRJNA269580	GSE63944	26280576	small RNA-Seq of the CA1 hippocampal subregion from 3 month and 20 month old animals treated orally with vehicle or SAHA	Aging and increased amyloid burden are major risk factors for cognitive diseases such as Alzheimer's Disease (AD). An effective therapy does not yet exist. Here we use mouse models for age-associated memory impairment and amyloid deposition to study transcriptome and cell type-specific epigenome plasticity at the systems level in the brain and in peripheral organs. We show that at the level of epigenetic gene-expression aging and amyloid pathology are associated with inflammation and impaired synaptic function in the hippocampal CA1 region. While inflammation is associated with increased gene-expression that is linked to a subset of transcription factors, de-regulation of plasticity genes is mediated via different mechanisms in the amyloid and the aging model. Amyloid pathology impairs histone-acetylation and decreases expression of plasticity genes while aging affects differential splicing that is linked to altered H4K12 acetylation at the intron-exon junction in neurons but not in non-neuronal cells. We furthermore show that oral administration of the clinically approved histone deacetylase inhibitor Vorinostat not only restores spatial memory, but also exhibits an anti-inflammatory action and reinstates epigenetic balance and transcriptional homeostasis at the level of gene expression and exon usage. This is the first systems-level investigation of transcriptome plasticity in the hippocampal CA1 region in aging and AD models and of the effects of an orally dosed histone deacetylase inhibitor. Our data has important implications for the development of minimally invasive and cost-effective therapeutic strategies against age-associated cognitive decline. In fact, our data strongly suggest to test Vorinostat in patients suffering from AD. Overall design: small RNA profile from aged animals (hippocampal CA1 region) treated with oral vehicle or SAHA for 4 weeks
PRJNA269577	GSE63943	26280576	mRNA-Seq of the CA1 hippocampal subregion and liver from 3 month and 20 month old animals treated orally with vehicle or SAHA and mRNA-Seq of CA1 of 10 month old WT or APP/PS1-21 transgenic animals treated orally with vehicle or SAHA	Aging and increased amyloid burden are major risk factors for cognitive diseases such as Alzheimer's Disease (AD). An effective therapy does not yet exist. Here we use mouse models for age-associated memory impairment and amyloid deposition to study transcriptome and cell type-specific epigenome plasticity at the systems level in the brain and in peripheral organs. We show that at the level of epigenetic gene-expression aging and amyloid pathology are associated with inflammation and impaired synaptic function in the hippocampal CA1 region. While inflammation is associated with increased gene-expression that is linked to a subset of transcription factors, de-regulation of plasticity genes is mediated via different mechanisms in the amyloid and the aging model. Amyloid pathology impairs histone-acetylation and decreases expression of plasticity genes while aging affects differential splicing that is linked to altered H4K12 acetylation at the intron-exon junction in neurons but not in non-neuronal cells. We furthermore show that oral administration of the clinically approved histone deacetylase inhibitor Vorinostat not only restores spatial memory, but also exhibits an anti-inflammatory action and reinstates epigenetic balance and transcriptional homeostasis at the level of gene expression and exon usage. This is the first systems-level investigation of transcriptome plasticity in the hippocampal CA1 region in aging and AD models and of the effects of an orally dosed histone deacetylase inhibitor. Our data has important implications for the development of minimally invasive and cost-effective therapeutic strategies against age-associated cognitive decline. In fact, our data strongly suggest to test Vorinostat in patients suffering from AD. Overall design: mRNA profile from aged (CA1 and liver) and APP/PS1 (CA1) animals treated with oral vehicle or SAHA for 4 weeks
PRJNA269576	GSE63942	26280576	Genome-wide analysis of H4K12 acetylation in neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei in young animals treated with vehicle, WT littermates of APP/PS1-21 animals treated with vehicle and aged and APP/PS1-21 animals treated with oral vehicle or SAHA for 4 weeks	Aging and increased amyloid burden are major risk factors for cognitive diseases such as Alzheimer's Disease (AD). An effective therapy does not yet exist. Here we use mouse models for age-associated memory impairment and amyloid deposition to study transcriptome and cell type-specific epigenome plasticity at the systems level in the brain and in peripheral organs. We show that at the level of epigenetic gene-expression aging and amyloid pathology are associated with inflammation and impaired synaptic function in the hippocampal CA1 region. While inflammation is associated with increased gene-expression that is linked to a subset of transcription factors, de-regulation of plasticity genes is mediated via different mechanisms in the amyloid and the aging model. Amyloid pathology impairs histone-acetylation and decreases expression of plasticity genes while aging affects differential splicing that is linked to altered H4K12 acetylation at the intron-exon junction in neurons but not in non-neuronal cells. We furthermore show that oral administration of the clinically approved histone deacetylase inhibitor Vorinostat not only restores spatial memory, but also exhibits an anti-inflammatory action and reinstates epigenetic balance and transcriptional homeostasis at the level of gene expression and exon usage. This is the first systems-level investigation of transcriptome plasticity in the hippocampal CA1 region in aging and AD models and of the effects of an orally dosed histone deacetylase inhibitor. Our data has important implications for the development of minimally invasive and cost-effective therapeutic strategies against age-associated cognitive decline. In fact, our data strongly suggest to test Vorinostat in patients suffering from AD. Overall design: Examination of H4K12 acetylation in neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei of young/old animals and WT/APP/PS1-21 animals. Inputs are also provided.
PRJNA255653	GSE59575	25692788	Direct but No Transgenerational Effects of Decitabine and Vorinostat on Male Fertility	Epigenetic drugs actively altering the epigenome of tumours have been developed for use in anti-cancer therapies. However, these drugs could potentially also affect the DNA methylome of spermatozoa that seems to be essential for male fertility. Here, we analysed possible direct and transgenerational effects of the epigenetic drug decitabine on the DNA methylome of spermatozoa. Our analysis revealed the absence of gross differences between the spermatozoal methylome of decitabine treated and untreated animals as well as between their F3 generations. Interestingly, the methylomes of spermatozoa from the selected mice of the F3-generations were also highly similar to the analysed parental samples. Overall design: We studied genome-wide DNA methylation changes in decitabine treated mice and their F3-generation. For this, we treated male C57BL/6 mice (seven weeks old) for seven weeks (intraperitoneal, three times per week) with the DNMT inhibitor decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, 0.1 µg/g, n = 17) or with vehicle (7.5 % dimethyl sulfoxide in phosphate buffered saline, n = 16). The dose of decitabine per treatment was chosen according to the clinical application regimens in humans and refer to previous mice studies using this drug (Kelly et al, 2003; Oakes et al, 2007). For the investigation of transgenerational effects, 10 treated and untreated male mice were mated with four untreated female C57BL/6 mice each. The offspring was considered as F1-generation. The F2- and F3-generations were obtained by an identical mating scheme. Thus, only the P-generation males were treated with decitabine or control vehicle, the F1-, F2- and F3-generations were not subjected to any treatment. During this study, all mice were housed at 24 °C on a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle and provided with food and tap-water ad libitum.
PRJNA252564	GSE58421	27185211	Increased Protein Processing Gene Signature in HDACi-resistant cells predicts response to proteasome inhibitors.	Epigenetic modifying enzymes are commonly mutated in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Importantly, genetics abnormalities lead to inactivation of HAT, which tilt the balance in favor of decreased protein acetylation in DLBCL cells. This suggests that protein acetylation regulation is an important factor in DLBCL pathogenesis and a potential target for therapy. We developed resistant cell lines to the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) vorinostat, in order to better define molecular mechanisms of action of HDACi in lymphoma cells. We found that cells resistant to HDACi have increased protein synthesis and proteasomal degradation. Additionally, cells resistant to HDACi have acquired increased susceptibility to proteasome inhibitors and this correlates with activation of the unfolded protein response. Importantly, using transcriptional signatures found in our resistant lymphoma cell line model, we show that tumors from DLBCL patients treated but unresponsive to HDACi therapy undergo similar changes. Together, these data show, for the first time, that HDACi may be used to prime DLBCL for targeted therapy including proteasome inhibitors. Overall design: Gene expression in U937 cells after 12h exposure to 2µM vorinostat and after development of resistance to 2 µM vorinostat, with and without vorinostat in the media.
PRJNA248301	GSE57871	26868908	RNA-seq analysis of vorinostat-resistant HCT116 cells following gene knockdown of GLI1 or PSMD13 with or without vorinostat treatment	Transcriptome analysis was conducted on vorinostat resistant HCT116 cells (HCT116-VR) upon knockdown of potential vorinostat resistance candidate genes in the presence and absence of vorinostat. Potential vorinostat resistance candidate genes chosen for this study were GLI1 and PSMD13, which were identified through a genome-wide synthetic lethal RNA interference screen. To understand the transcriptional events underpinning the effect of GLI1 and PSMD13 knockdown (sensitisation to vorinostat-induced apoptosis), cells were first subjected to gene knockdown, then to treatment with vorinsotat or the solvent control. Two timepoints for drug treatment were assessed: a timepoint before induction of apoptosis (4hrs for siGLI1 and 8hrs for siPSMD13) and a timepoint when apoptosis could be detected (8hrs for siGLI1 and 12hrs for siPSMD13). Overall design: There are 42 samples in total, from triplicate independent biological experiments of 14 samples each.
PRJNA244587	GSE56788	RNA-seq analysis of vorinostat-resistant HCT116 cells following gene knockdown of potential vorinostat-resistance candidate genes	Potential vorinostat-resistance candidate genes were identified using RNA interference screening in vorinostat-resistant HCT116 cells (HCT116-VR) using a synthetic lethal approach. In order to understand the mechanisms by which these genes contributed to vorinostat response, transcriptomic analysis was conducted on HCT116-VR cells and those with siRNA-mediated knockdown of each of the vorinostat resistance candidate genes. Overall design: There are 45 samples in total, from triplicate independent biological experiments of 15 samples each. The negative control to which all gene knockdowns are compared is the mock transfection control (mock).
PRJNA242698	GSE56188	Combinatorial targeting of the AR for treatment of prostate cancer.	Combining different clinical agents to target multiple pathways in prostate cancer cells, including androgen receptor (AR) signaling, is potentially an effective strategy to improve outcomes for men with metastatic disease. We have previously demonstrated that sub-effective concentrations of an AR antagonist, bicalutamide, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, vorinostat (SAHA), and a hsp90 inhibitor, 17-AAG, act synergistically when combined to cause death of AR-dependent prostate cancer cells. In this study, expression profiling of human prostate cancer cells treated with bicalutamide, vorinostat (SAHA) or 17-AAG, alone or in paired combination, was employed to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying these synergistic interactions. We used microarray analysis to determine the global molecular profile contributing to the synergistic cell death in LNCaP human prostate cancer cells caused by combinations of bicalutamide, vorinostat (SAHA), or 17-AAG. Overall design: LNCaP human prostate cancer cells were treated for 6 hours with drug treatments as follows: vehicle control, 5 uM bicalutamide, 1 uM vorinostat (SAHA), 40 nM 17-AAG, 5 uM bicalutamide + 40 nM 17-AAG, 40 nM 17-AAG + 1 uM vorinostat (SAHA), or 5 uM bicalutamide + 1 uM vorinostat (SAHA). Each treatment was performed in sextuplicate.
PRJNA202059	GSE46703	25501337	24587009	The Pelvic Radiation and Vorinostat (PRAVO) Study - Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Activity	The study objective was to propose molecular mechanisms of action of the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat. In the PRAVO phase 1 study, patients that were scheduled to receive pelvic palliative radiation to 30 Gy in 3-Gy fractions for gastrointestinal carcinoma, were enrolled onto four sequential dose levels of vorinostat, starting at 100 mg daily with dose escalation in increments of 100 mg. Endpoints included treatment safety and tolerability, tumor response, and biological activity of vorinostat. For the purpose of identifying biomarkers of vorinostat action, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, representing normal tissue exposed to vorinostat, were used. The samples were collected, one at baseline and two on-treatment samples. The time points for sample collection were chosen based on our previous data from experimental colorectal carcinoma models exposed to vorinostat, demonstrating that the maximum tumor histone acetylation 2-3 hours after drug exposure was restored to baseline after 24 hours. In PRAVO study patients, tumor histone hyperacetylation was observed 3 hours after vorinostat administration. Overall design: From the 17 patients enrolled onto the PRAVO study, a full set of three samples was obtained from 14 individuals: one baseline sample collected prior to commencement of vorinostat treatment (T0), and two on-treatment samples collected 2 and 24 hours after the patient had received the preceding daily dose of vorinostat (T2 and T24). Individual vorinostat dose levels were 100 mg (D100), 200 mg (D200), 300 mg (D300), or 400 mg (D400).
PRJNA192835	GSE45018	23532732	Comparison between HuT78 parental and romidpepsin-selected cell lines	Gene expression values were determined for HuT78 parental cells and cells selected with romidpesin in the presence of P-glycoprotein inhibitors. HuT78 DpVp35 cells are maintained in 35 ng/ml romidepsin with 2.5 µg/ml verapamil and HuT78 DpP100 cells are maintained in 100 ng/ml romidepsin with 1 µM valspodar To identify molecular determinants of histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDI) resistance, we selected HuT78 cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) cells with romidepsin in the presence of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) inhibitors to prevent transporter upregulation. Resistant sublines were 250- to 385-fold resistant to romidepsin and were resistant to apoptosis induced by apicidin, entinostat, panobinostat, belinostat and vorinostat. A custom Taqman array identified increased insulin receptor (INSR) gene expression; immunoblot analysis confirmed increased expression and a 4- to 8-fold increase in mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK) phosphorylation in resistant cells compared to parental cells. Resistant cells were exquisitely sensitive to MEK inhibitors and apoptosis correlated with restoration of proapoptotic Bim. Romidepsin combined with MEK inhibitors yielded greater apoptosis in cells expressing mutant KRAS compared to romidepsin treatment alone. Gene expression analysis of samples obtained from patients with CTCL enrolled on the NCI1312 Phase II study of romidepsin in T-cell lymphoma suggested perturbation of the MAPK pathway by romidepsin. Immunohistochemical analysis of Bim expression demonstrated decreased expression in some skin biopsies at disease progression. These findings implicate increased activation of MEK and decreased Bim expression as a resistance mechanism to HDIs, supporting combination of romidepsin with MEK inhibitors in clinical trials. Overall design: Gene expression in resistant lines was compared to parental lines
PRJNA190665	GSE44621	23524983	Expression profiling comparisons of human PBMC treated with class I/IIb or class IIa HDAC inhibitors	The aim of this study was to identify differential gene expression resulting from the inhibition of class IIa HDACs in human PBMC. Overall design: Human PBMC were cultured ex vivo with a mitogenic stimulus (1 ug/ml phytohemagglutinin, PHA) for 60 hours concurrent with exposure to vehicle (DMSO), vorinostat (3 uM), or TMP195 (3 uM). In addition to the whole PBMC populations, a portion of the cultures treated with DMSO or TMP195 were used for FACS purification of mutually exclusive CD3+ (T cell), CD19+ (B cell), and CD14+ (monocyte) populations. All samples were then processed for RNA extraction, labeling, and hybridization to Affymetrix arrays. Vehicle vs. vorinostat vs. TMP195 treatments in PBMC; Vehicle vs. TMP195 treatment in CD3+, CD19+ or CD14+ cells
PRJNA184052	GSE43010	23449455	HDAC Inhibitors induce tumor cell-selective pro-apoptotic transcriptional responses.	The identification of recurrent somatic mutations in genes encoding epigenetic enzymes, coupled with biochemical studies demonstrating aberrant recruitment of epigenetic enzymes such as histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone methyltransferases (HMTs) to promoter regions through association with oncogenic fusion proteins such as PML-RARα and AML1-ETO has provided a strong rationale for the development compounds that target the epigenome for the treatment of cancer. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) are potent inducers of tumor cell apoptosis but it remains unclear why tumor cells are selectively sensitive to HDACi-induced cell death. Herein we assessed the biological and molecular responses of normal and transformed cells to the FDA-approved HDACi vorinostat. Both HDACi selectively killed cells of diverse tissue origin that had been transformed through the serial introduction of different oncogenes. Time course microarray expression profiling revealed that normal and transformed cells transcriptionally responded to vorinostat treatment. Over 4200 genes responded differently to vorinostat in normal and transformed cells and gene ontology and pathway analyses identified a tumor-cell-selective pro-apoptotic gene-expression signature that consisted of BCL2 family genes. In particular, HDACi induced tumor cell-selective upregulation of the pro-apoptotic gene BMF and downregulation of the pro-survival gene BCL2A1 encoding BFL-1. Maintenance of BFL-1 levels in transformed cells through forced expression conferred vorinostat resistance indicating that specific and selective engagement of the intrinsic apoptosis pathways underlies the tumor cell-selective apoptotic activities of these agents. The ability of HDACi to affect the growth and survival of tumor cells whilst leaving normal cells relatively unharmed is fundamental to their successful clinical application. This study provides new insight into the transcriptional effects of HDACi in human donor-matched normal and transformed cells, and identifies molecules and pathways that could underpin the tumor-selective cytotoxic activity of these compounds. Overall design: Whole genome expression profiling was performed for vorinostat-treated samples and control samples (DMSO vehicle control). Fourteen samples were included in this study. Each sample has three biological replicates, making forty-two arrays in total.
PRJNA170509	GSE39292	27346347	Oncogenic EGFR Represses the TET1 DNA Demethylase to Induce Silencing of Tumor Suppressors in Cancer Cells	Oncogene-induced DNA methylation-mediated transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressors frequently occurs in cancer, but the mechanism and functional role of this silencing in oncogenesis is not fully understood. Here, we show that oncogenic epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) induces silencing of multiple unrelated tumor suppressors in lung adenocarcinomas and glioblastomas by inhibiting DNA demethylase TET oncogene family member 1 (TET1) via the C/EBPα transcription factor. After oncogenic EGFR inhibition, TET1 binds to tumor suppressor promoters and induces their re-expression via active DNA demethylation. Ectopic expression of TET1 potently inhibits lung and glioblastoma tumor growth, and TET1 knockdown confers resistance to EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer cells. Lung cancer samples exhibited reduced TET1 expression or TET1 cytoplasmic localization in a majority of cases. Collectively, these results identify a conserved pathway of oncogenic EGFR-induced DNA methylation-mediated transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressors, which may have therapeutic benefit for oncogenic EGFR-mediated lung cancers and glioblastomas. Overall design: HCC827-Del (EGFR L747-S752) and HCC827-Del-TM (EGFR L747-S752/T790M) cell lines were treated with Decitibine (2.5 μM) and Vorinostat (1μM) or as a control cells that were treated with DMSO for 72 hrs. Expression profiling was performed using 3 biological replicates for each condition for a total of 12 samples analyzed.
PRJNA168558	GSE38745	Acquired resistance of Jurkat cells to TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL): a role for histone deacetylase inhibitors as powerful apoptosis sensitizer.	Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) has been shown to be a potent inducer of apoptosis in various cancer cell lines and primary cancer cells. However, in clinical trials administration of recombinant TRAIL or TRAIL death receptor agonists did not show sufficient efficacy for treatment of tested malignant disorders compared to standard chemotherapy. Acquired resistance of cancer cells to TRAIL and to other “death receptor” ligands may explain not only the inability of TRAIL and TRAIL “death receptor” agonists to achieve the clearance of cancer cells in vivo but also the escape of cancer cells from immune cell – mediated killing. Selective pressure of TRAIL on TRAIL-sensitive Jurkat T-lymphoblastic leukemia cells provided several TRAIL resistant Jurkat cell line clones (TR1, TR2, TR3). Irrespective of molecular changes histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), such as suberoylanilide-hydroxamic acid (SAHA, vorinostat), were able to restore sensitivity of all three TRAIL-resistant clones to TRAIL. Gene expression analysis of TR1 clone treated with SAHA 1microM for 12 hours compared to untreated TR1 clone showed significant decrease in expression of CFLAR/cFLIP (0.71; p=0.006), BIRC5/survivin (0.80; p=0.024) and BID (0.66; p<0.001). Expression of both TRAIL “death” receptors DR4 (1.57; p<0.001) and DR5 (1.47; p=0.002) were significantly increased compared to untreated TR1 cells. The mRNA expression of caspases-2,-3,-8,-9,-10 did not significantly change with the SAHA treatment. Overall design: Total cellular RNA was isolated from biologic duplicates of untreated Jurkat cells (WT), TRAIL resistant Jurkat cell clone (TR1) and 1 µM and 0.5 µM suberoylanilide-hydroxamic acid (SAHA, vorinostat) treated TR1 cell clones for 12 hours. Jurkat cell line subclones TR1was established by selective pressure of TRAIL 1000 ng/mL on Jurkat cells over the period of 12 weeks.
PRJNA161501	GSE37529	25473896	U937 scramble vs shHDAC2 upon SAHA (Vorinostat; suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) treatment	Transcriptional profiling of U937 scramble vs shHDAC2 before and after SAHA treatment at 5µM concentration for 6 and 24 hours. Overall design: Different Experimental Conditions: U937 scramble (U937 trasfected with empty vector) vs shHDAC2 (U937 trasfected with shHDAC2 vector), untreated and treated with SAHA at 5 µM concentration for 6h and 24h. Biological replicates: 2 for each sample, independently grown and harvested at 6 and 24 hours. One replicate per array.
PRJNA159569	GSE37374	24349422	miRNA expression profiling of NB4 control cells versus NB4 cells treated with SAHA (Vorinostat)	For a long time, the BARD1 (BRCA1-associated RING domain 1) protein has been considered as a BRCA1 (BReast Cancer susceptibility gene 1, early onset) interactor, and tumor suppressor mutated in breast and ovarian cancers. Despite its functions in a stable heterodimer with BRCA1, there is increasing evidence for BRCA1-independent functions of BARD1. Here, we investigated BARD1 expression and function in human acute myeloid leukemias and their modulation by epigenetic mechanisms and microRNA. We show that the HDACi (histone deacetylase inhibitor) Vorinostat reduces BARD1 mRNA levels by increasing miR-19a and miR-19b expression levels. Moreover, we identify specific BARD1 isoforms that might act as tumor diagnostic and prognostic markers. Overall design: Two-condition experiment: untreated NB4 cells (control) vs. NB4 cells treated with 5µM SAHA (Vorinostat) for 6h. Biological replicates: 3 control, 3 treated, independently grown and harvested at 6 hours. One replicate per array.
PRJNA156033	GSE35245	Genistein Cooperates with the Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Vorinostat to Induce Cell Death in Prostate Cancer Cells (methylation data)	We have investigated the effects of genistein on several prostate cancer cell lines, including the ARCaP-E/ARCaP-M model of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), to analyze effects on their epigenetic state. In addition, we investigated the effects of combined treatment of genistein with the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat on survival in prostate cancer cells. Using whole-genome expression profiling and whole-genome methylation profiling, we have determined the genome-wide differences in genetic and epigenetic responses to genistein in prostate cancer cells before and after undergoing the EMT. Also, cells were treated with genistein, vorinostat, and a combination treatment, where cell death and cell proliferation was determined. Overall design: ARCAP-E, ARCAP-M, and normal human PrEC cells were analyzed for genome-wide methylation using the Illumina 27K CpG Methylation BeadChip. ARCAP-E and ARCAP-M cells were treated with DMSO as a negative control, genistein, or 5-aza-deoxycytidine as a positive control for demethylation. PrEC cells, used as a normal human prostate cell line control, were untreated.
PRJNA156031	GSE35242	Genistein Cooperates with the Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Vorinostat to Induce Cell Death in Prostate Cancer Cells (expression data)	We have investigated the effects of genistein on several prostate cancer cell lines, including the ARCaP-E/ARCaP-M model of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), to analyze effects on their epigenetic state. In addition, we investigated the effects of combined treatment of genistein with the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat on survival in prostate cancer cells. Using whole-genome expression profiling and whole-genome methylation profiling, we have determined the genome-wide differences in genetic and epigenetic responses to genistein in prostate cancer cells before and after undergoing the EMT. Also, cells were treated with genistein, vorinostat, and a combination treatment, where cell death and cell proliferation was determined. Overall design: ARCaP-E and ARCaP-M cells were analyzed for whole genome expression using the Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChip. Samples were treated with DMSO control, genistein, vorinostat, a combination of vorinostat and genistein, or 5-aza-deoxycytidine. Samples were prepared in triplicate on independent days.
PRJNA152811	GSE35246	Genistein Cooperates with the Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Vorinostat to Induce Cell Death in Prostate Cancer Cells	This SuperSeries is composed of the SubSeries listed below. Overall design: Refer to individual Series
PRJNA151199	GSE34452	18980983	A Multi-loop, Double-cube Microarray Design Applied to Prostate Cancer Cell Lines with Variable Sensitivity to Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors	Implementation of a complex design for a microarray experiment on resistance mechanisms of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI). Overall design: To improve our understanding of the underlying mechanism of HDACI resistance in prostate cancer cells, we designed a novel ‘‘multiple-loop, double-cube’’ cDNA microarray experiment. In the experiment DU-145 and PC3 cells were treated with two different HDACIs (vorinostat and valproic acid) and incubation periods (48 and 96 hours). Preprocessing included exploratory analyses of the quality of the arrays and intensity-dependent within-array Loess normalization. An ANOVA model was used for inference. The results were validated by Western blot analysis of known treatment targets.
PRJNA150095	GSE34880	22496163	Epigenetic reprogramming in relapsed childhood ALL	Reversing gene expression signatures in relapsed patient may restore chemosensitivity. We demonstrate that the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat not only reprograms the aberrant gene expression profile of relapsed blasts but is synergistic when applied prior to chemotherapy in primary patient samples and leukemia cell lines Overall design: Primary patient samples were collected from patients treated at the New York University Medical Center and from the Children’s Oncology Group (COG) cell bank,RNA was isolated from three primary patient samples and three B-lineage leukemia cell lines with or without treatment with vorinostat for 24 hours.
PRJNA144249	GSE30884	22424710	Gene expression profiles of Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells after treatment with vorinostat	By using high-density DNA microarrays, we analyzed the gene-expression profile of Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line L-540 after tretament with the histone deactelyse inhibitor vorinostat. Kewitz et al., submitted Overall design: RNA was extracted from established Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line L-540 and hybridized with Affymetrix HG_U133A microarrays.
PRJNA141527	GSE29419	Chronic SAHA in mouse frontal cortex	We employed microarray analysis to compare gene expression profiles in mice chronically treated with the HDAC inhibitor SAHA. Several of the differentially expressed genes were specifically associated to mechanisms that govern cellular assembly and/or synaptic connectivity Overall design: Mice were chronically (21 days) treated with SAHA (Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid; vorinostat) (20 mg/kg ip), or vehicle, and sacrificed one day after the last injection. The day of the experiment, mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and bilateral frontal cortex was dissected.
PRJNA137503	GSE27226	21772049	HDACI and DAC induce specific epigenetic profile in DLBCL	Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common type of lymphoid neoplasm in the world representing 30-40% of all lymphomas. Standard immunochemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone and rituximab) ensures cure in 60 to 65% of patients, while the rest progress or relapse. While advances have been made in the treatment of DLBCL, especially with the addition of rituximab, it is now apparent that there may be significant differences in prognosis that are related to the cell of origin, and that this disease is heterogeneous and novel treatment options are needed. It has been hypothesized that the combination of HDACI and hypomethylating agents might be a new approach to the treatment of relapsed or refractory DLBCL. This combination is thought to disrupt the transcription repressor complex consisting of methyl binding domain proteins (MBDP) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). We have explored the effect of different HDACI and decitabine combinations in in vitro and in vivo models of DLBCL. These data suggest a class effect, with all four HDACI (panobinostat, belinostat, vorinostat, depsipeptide) synergizing with decitabine in cytotoxicity assay across the spectrum of DLBCL cells. Synergy was validated in a number of other assays including a caspase 3 activation and apoptosis. Furthermore, the combination of panobinostat and decitabine induced markedly increased histone acetylation. The in vitro observations were confirmed in an in vivo murine xenograft experiment with the Ly1 DLBCL line. Genome wide methylation analysis and gene expression profiling demonstrated that the combination of these two epigenetic therapies produced a unique gene expression profile compared to the samples treated with single drugs. These data strongly support the potential therapeutic role of a combinatorial epigenetic platform for the treatment of B-cell lymphomas, in particular in patients with DLBCL. Clearly, future studies will need to focus on integrating the appropriate correlative studies, with an effort to identify and or validate biomarkers of activity with these combinations. The likelihood moving forward is that the mechanism of action of these combinations may vary from disease context to disease context. Genome-wide array findings from these kinds of studies could be expanded to samples from patients on clinical trials to identify novel biomarkers of response, leading to the rational treatment of individual diseases based upon the underlying pathogenesis. Overall design: We have used single samples from three DLBCL cell lines (biological replicates) which were treated with DMSO, decitabine alone, panobinostat alone and their combination for 48h - total of 12 samples
PRJNA123999	GSE19750	24238056	26963385	Adrenocortical Carcinoma Gene Expression Profiling [Affymetrix]	Background: Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is associated with poor survival rates. The objective of the study was to analyze ACC gene expression profiling data prognostic biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets. Methods: 44 ACC and 4 normal adrenal glands were profiled on Affymetrix U133 Plus 2 expression microarrays and pathway and transcriptional enrichment analysis performed. Protein levels were determined by western blot. Drug efficacy was assessed against ACC cell lines. Previously published expression datasets were analyzed as validation data sets. Results: Pathway enrichment analysis identified marked dysregulation of cyclin-dependent kinases and mitosis. Over-expression of PTTG1, which encodes securin, a negative regulator of p53, was identified as a marker of poor survival. Median survival for patients with tumors expressing high PTTG1 levels (log2 ratio of PTTG1 to average beta-actin <-3.04 ) was 1.8 years compared to 9.0 years if tumors expressed lower levels of PTTG1 (P<0.0001). These findings were confirmed by our analysis of previously published datasets. Treatment of ACC cell lines with vorinostat decreased securin levels and inhibited cell growth (IC50s of 1.69 uM and 0.891 uM, for SW-13 and H295R, respectively). Conclusion: Over-expression of PTTG1 is correlated with poor survival in ACC. PTTG1/securin is a prognostic biomarker and warrants investigation as a therapeutic target. Overall design: RNA from forty-four adrenocortical carcinomas and four normal adrenal glands was extracted, labeled, and hybridized to Affymetrix U133 Plus 2 arrays. The resulting data was normalized by gcRMA with quantile normalization and background subtraction after using the ExpressionFileCreator in GenePattern. Data was then floored at 5.5 using PreprocessDataset, and filtered to remove 1) probes with more than 35 floored values and/or 2) probes where all values from one batch were floored while values from the other batch were not. Further batch effects were minimized using ComBat with the parametric option. Data was then floored at 2. Differentially expressed genes were determined using a T-test with multiple comparison correction as implemented by Comparative Marker Selection in Gene Pattern. Genes with the corrected p-value < 0.005 and the FDR < 0.075 were selected for further study. For comparing high to low grade or primary to recurrence, the FDR cut-off was increased to < 0.13. Survival analysis was conducted using Prism 6 (GraphPad) to generate Kaplan-Meier curves that were compared by log-rank.
PRJNA121351	GSE18544	19789319	Expression Profiling of a Mouse Xenograft Model of “Triple-Negative” Breast Cancer Brain Metastases With Vorinostat	Gene Expression Profiling of a Mouse Xenograft Model of “Triple-Negative” Breast Cancer Brain Metastases With and Without Vorinostat Treatment. Purpose: As chemotherapy and molecular therapy improve the systemic survival of breast cancer patients, the incidence of brain metastases increases. Few therapeutic strategies exist for the treatment of brain metastases because the blood-brain barrier severely limits drug access. We report the pharmacokinetic, efficacy, and mechanism of action studies for the histone deactylase inhibitor vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) in a preclinical model of brain metastasis of triple-negative breast cancer. Experimental Design: The 231-BR brain trophic subline of the MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line was injected into immunocompromised mice for pharmacokinetic and metastasis studies. Pharmacodynamic studies compared histone acetylation, apoptosis, proliferation, and DNA damage in vitro and in vivo. Results: Following systemic administration, uptake of [14C]vorinostat was significant into normal rodent brain and accumulation was up to 3-fold higher in a proportion of metastases formed by 231-BR cells. Vorinostat prevented the development of 231-BR micrometastases by 28% (P = 0.017) and large metastases by 62% (P < 0.0001) compared with vehicle-treated mice when treatment was initiated on day 3 post-injection. The inhibitory activity of vorinostat as a single agent was linked to a novel function in vivo: induction of DNA double-strand breaks associated with the down-regulation of the DNA repair gene Rad52. Conclusions: We report the first preclinical data for the prevention of brain metastasis of triple-negative breast cancer. Vorinostat is brain permeable and can prevent the formation of brain metastases by 62%. Its mechanism of action involves the induction of DNA double-strand breaks, suggesting rational combinations with DNA active drugs or radiation. Overall design: We performed gene expression profiling on metastases from vehicle- or vorinostat-treated mice to determine if alterations in gene expression were observable that were consistent with the phenotypes observed. Brain metastases from five vehicle-treated mice and six 150 mg/kg vorinostat-treated mice were procured by laser capture microdissection. RNA was extracted from the captured tumor cells from each brain and two rounds of linear amplification was done. The amplified RNA from each mouse was processed separately through microarray hybridization and analysis.
PRJNA108655	GSE10089	18606719	Anti-tumor Activity of Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells	In order to ascertain the potential for histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor-based treatment in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we analyzed the anti-tumour effects of Trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (vorinostat) in a panel of 16 NSCLC cell lines via MTT assay. TSA and vorinostat both displayed strong anti-tumor activities in a proportion of NSCLC cell lines, and suggesting the need for the use of predictive markers to select patients receiving this treatment. There was a strong correlation between the responsiveness to TSA and vorinostat (P < 0.0001). To identify a molecular model of sensitivity to HDAC inhibitor treatment in NSCLC, we conducted a gene expression profiling study using cDNA arrays on the same set of cell lines and related the cytotoxic activity of TSA to corresponding gene expression pattern using a modified NCI program. In addition, pathway analysis was performed with Pathway Architect software. We used nine genes, which were identified by gene-drug sensitivity correlation and pathway analysis, to build a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm model by which sensitive cell lines were distinguished from resistant cell lines. The prediction performance of the SVM model was validated by an additional seven cell lines, resulting in a prediction value of 100% in respect to determining response to TSA. Our results suggested that [1] HDAC inhibitors may be promising anticancer drugs to NSCLC, and [2] the nine gene classifer is useful in predicting drug sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors and may contribute to achieving individualized therapy for NSCLC patients. training sample set: GSM94303 PC9 GSM94304 PC7 GSM94305 PC14 GSM94306 A549 GSM94308 LK2 GSM94313 RERF LC-KJ GSM94314 RERF LC-MS GSM94315 RERF-LC-AI GSM94316 PC-1 GSM94317 PC-3 GSM94319 PC-10 GSM94323 ABC-1 GSM94324 EBC-1 GSM94325 LC2/ad GSM94328 SQ-5 GSM94329 QG-56 test sample set: GSM94307 LU65 GSM94326 LC1/sq GSM94327 LC-1F GSM254967 LCOK GSM254968 LCD GSM254969 H1650 GSM254970 H1975 Keywords: HDAC inhibitor, NSCLC, cDNA array, drug sensitivity test, pathway analysis Overall design: gene expression analyis in lung cancer cell lines
